Add an async/sync io policy (#555)
Oxen-AI/Oxen: docs/async_policy.md

# Async/Sync IO Policy

> This document defines how Oxen Rust code should approach the boundary between async (Tokio) and sync (std + sync C/C++ bindings) IO.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document defines how Oxen Rust code should approach the boundary between async (Tokio) and sync (std + sync C/C++ bindings) IO.

To jump ahead into the core guidelines, see [The Core Philosophy](#the-core-philosophy).
```

Reviewer: I think the section layout is ok. But I could see someone reading this as a reference and wanting to get to the main point of this document too. A table of contents could help here, but I felt that at least being able to jump to the core philosophy part would be helpful for someone referencing this doc.

Author: ✅ Done

5. **CPU-parallel batch work uses `rayon`, not `FuturesUnordered<spawn_blocking>`.** Tokio's blocking pool is sized and tuned for "lots of stuff occasionally blocked on syscalls" (default cap 512 threads, no work-stealing). It is not the right tool for "use all cores to hash 50 000 files." Rayon is.

6. **Streaming IO that interleaves sync local work with async network work uses one long-lived `spawn_blocking` task on the sync side, paired with an async task on the network side, bridged by a bounded `tokio::sync::mpsc` channel.** The bound throttles a fast producer to the consumer's pace, keeping memory in check; the long-lived task means one blocking-pool worker for the whole stream rather than a fresh dispatch per chunk.

## The core rule

> **Public APIs are async. The sync core (filesystem, RocksDB, LMDB, DuckDB) runs inside `spawn_blocking` closures sized to a coherent unit of work. Network IO stays in the async sections between and around those closures.**

> This is "sync core, async edge" — the same shape used by cargo, sccache, and other heavy Rust tools that mix network and disk IO. Async is reserved for what genuinely benefits from it (concurrent network round trips, HTTP serving). Sync is used for what is sync underneath anyway.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Oxen uses a **sync core, async edge** philosophy:
> Public APIs for `async` code, even if that `async` code is mixed with synchronous code, must be `async`.
Avoid situations where synchronous code calls asynchronous code. Any `pub fn` in Oxen that is not `async` must not call any `async` functions _(e.g. via a `spawn_blocking` call)._

All **network I/O** code must be `async`. This encompasses all communication over a socket (e.g. HTTP, gRPC, S3, etc.).

However, not all Oxen code should be async. All filesystem operations should be sync. Most logic should be sync. `async` describes an effect of code, so it should only be used when that effect is applicable. As much as possible, logic should be factored out into sync functions and used in `async fn` when the logic needs to be used in some specific asynchronous context.

This "sync core, async edge" is a popular Rust philosophy used by `cargo`, `sccache`, and other heavy Rust tools that mix network and disk I/O. Async is reserved for what genuinely benefits from it (concurrent network round trips, HTTP serving). Sync is used for logic and for operations that are implemented synchronously.
```

Reviewer: Updated from conversation (https://oxenai.slack.com/archives/C0AJ635QE3D/p1779210204287429?thread_ts=1778886551.013479&cid=C0AJ635QE3D)

Author: ✅ I integrated this language into the document, with a little bit of massaging.
